MEAL PREP
GUIDE
by Joseph Abell
Start your meal prep journey today
01
CONTENTS
Contents. 01
Meal Prep Guide. 02
Planning. 04
Ingredients. 05
Shopping. 08
Cooking. 09
Storage. 10
Freezing. 11
Spoilage. 12
Reheating. 13
Stovetop Heating. 16
Finishing Touches. 17
Common Challenges. 18
Your New Life Skill 20
MEAL PREP GUIDE
MEAL PREP GUIDE
Cooking your own food is the secret to losing fat,
gaining muscle, and feeling great.
It's 7 PM on a Tuesday.
You had a long day at work.
The last thing you want to do is spend a half hour on your feet in a
kitchen full of raw ingredients. Your phone buzzes with a notification
from a food delivery app. You want to eat healthy, but right now,
you'd rather kick your feet up and watch YouTube.
"Ijust can't cook today," you tell yourself. At that moment, countless
people around the world are saying the same thing - putting off their
health and fitness for one more day.
The secret to losing fat, gaining muscle, and feeling great isn't a
magic workout or a complicated diet. It's taking control of what you
eat. Home-cooked meals give you total command over your portions,
ingredients, and calories, which is the only way to guarantee you're
hitting your targets.
But your schedule is already packed, so how do you fit in cooking?
02 MEAL PREP GUIDE
MEAL PREP GUIDE
The solution is a strategy used by everyone from elite athletes to
busy parents: meal prep. This is the art of planning, cooking, and
storing your meals in advance. Instead of scrambling to cook each
day, you invest an hour twice a week to prepare meals in batches.
The result is a fridge full of healthy, delicious food, ready to be
reheated in minutes.
Meal prep is the system that makes eating well effortless. It's the
ultimate tool to:
• Reclaim your weeknights.
Spend less time cooking and cleaning, and more time on what
matters.
• Sidestep the takeout traр.
When a delicious meal is ten feet away, greasy takeout loses its
appeal. You literally won't need willpower anymore - just eat the
tastiest, most convenient food available!
• Guarantee your nutritional success.
Precisely hit your calorie and protein goals so you're not surprised
when you step on the scale.
• Save money and reduce waste.
Batch cooking is the most efficient use of groceries. Your food
budget will shrink, and you'll have more money for other things.
Equipped with this guide and the recipes in my cookbooks, you'l
have everything you need to become a master food prepper. Let's
go.
03 MEAL PREP GUIDE
PLANNING
• Take planning seriously.
A good plan is the difference between a week of effortless, healthy
meals and a fridge full of random ingredients that go to waste.
• Start with a goal of eating one prepped meal per day.
That's it. The aim is to build a sustainable habit. Even if your other
meals are takeout or quick snacks, you are still making a massive
positive change that you will feel. As you get more confident, you
can prep more meals and feel even better.
• Choose 2-3 recipes for the week.
This is the fun part. Stick to simple, versatile meals that reheat
well. Protagonist Cookbook and Insanely Easy Cookbook are full
of great choices. You can stick entirely to those recipes, or use
your own favorites. Check the next page to see if a recipe will work
well as meal prep.
• Anchor with protein.
Every meal should have a solid protein source like chicken, eggs,
lean beef, or tofu. Protein is what keeps you full and builds muscle.
A good target to aim for is O.8g of protein per pound of body
weight (1.76g per kilogram).
Make it Realistic.
Meal prep is not the time to try a complicated, multi-hour recipe
for the first time. It's great to challenge yourself in the kitchen, but
meal prepping is supposed to reduce stress. Pick meals you
genuinely enjoy and know you can count on.
04 MEAL PREP GUIDE
05
.
INGREDIENTS
BASE
Use a base that absorbs flavor, lasts in the fridge or freezer, and
reheats well.
Rice
Quinoa
Pasta
Barley
GOOD
Sweet potatoes
Roasted white potatoes
Hard squashes like butternut
Lentils
AVOID
Bread becomes soggy.
Anything crispy absorbs
moisture and loses texture.
Delicate greens wilt and
become slimy.
White potatoes separate
when reheated (unless
roasted).
Zucchini noodles release
water during storage, making
the meal mushy.
MEAL PREP GUIDE
06
INGREDIENTS
PROTEIN
Use a protein that keeps its texture and tastes great when
reheated.
Chicken
GOOD
Ground meat like beef and
turkey
Firm fish like salmon
Hardboiled eggs
Tofu
Beans
AVOID
Breaded or fried proteins
become soggy.
Delicate or flaky fish like cod
dries out and falls apart.
Steak will continue to cook
when reheated, making it
tough and overdone.
Scrambled or fried eggs lose
their flavor.
MEAL PREP GUIDE
OTHER INGREDIENTS
Use ingredients that last well in storage without losing their
structure or soaking the rest of the meal. Some ingredients are
best stored separately and added right before you eat.
INCLUDE
• Clear, red, and brown sauces
Cruciferous vegetables likе
broccoli
Root vegetables like carrots
• Firm vegetables like bell
peppers
Onions
Green beans
• Asparagus
•
Mushrooms
Corn
Peas
STORE SEPARATELY
Green and white sauces
Salad dressing
Salsa
Crunchy nuts like walnuts
Delicate greens like lettuce
Fresh herbs like basil
Avocado
Soft cheese
Juicy vegetables like tomato
07 MEAL PREP GUIDE
SHOPPING
• Shop your kitchen first.
Take five minutes to explore every corner of your fridge, freezer,
cabinets, and pantry. Know what you have so you don't waste
money on duplicates.
• Make a shopping list.
Working from the ingredient lists in the recipes you've selected,
write down everything you need to buy. Organize it by section
(Produce, Meat & Dairy, Frozen, etc) so you only need one trip
through the store.
Stay focused.
Grocery stores are engineered to tempt you with impulse buys.
When you wander the aisles in search of inspiration, you're really
just soaking up the marketing until you buy stuff you shouldn't.
Go in with a list and execute the mission.
• Shop the perimeter.
This is a classic pro-shopper strategy. The outer walls of a grocery
store are typically where you find whole foods like fresh produce,
meat, and dairy. The center aisles hold more processed items.
When in doubt, stay on the edge.
• Buy staples in bulk.
You can save a lot of time and money by stocking up on
non-perishables like rice, pasta, oats, frozen chicken and frozen
veggies.
• Start your spice collection.
All you need to be a respectable home cook is salt, pepper, garlic
powder, onion powder, and paprika. Once you've mastered those,
you can go back to the spice section and start experimenting.
08 MEAL PREP GUIDE
COOKING
Set aside an hour on a weekend or evening to cook your meals.
A good starting schedule is to prep once on Sunday and again on
Thursday.
• Put your kitchen to work.
Grill multiple chicken breasts, roast a big tray of veggies, and make
a pot of quinoa all at once. An expert meal prepper keeps multiple
stovetops and the oven busy at the same time.
• Season generously.
Most people under-season their food, which is a critical mistake
when cooking in batches. Proper seasoning is vital to making sure
your meals taste delicious after being reheated. When in doubt,
use the five essential spices from the previous page.
• Taste as you go.
Don't wait until the end to find out how your food tastes. Great
flavor is built in layers. Periodically taste your food once it's safe to
eat - like sauces or cooked vegetables - and adjust the spices as
needed.
• Multiply.
Don't hesitate to double or triple a recipe. It's the easiest way to
feed your family, or just stock your freezer so you can go longer
before your next cooking session.
09 MEAL PREP GUIDE
STORAGE
Portion First.
It's easy to overeat when you're scooping directly from a huge pot
onto a plate. To avoid that, divide your food into individual portions
and store in separate containers. This makes mealtime easy and
ensures that you eat one serving per meal.
• Skip the measuring.
You don't have to measure every serving carefully. As long as you
divide the total batch into even portions, the total amount of
calories will be correct and will average out through the week.
• Choose containers wisely.
Glass and ceramic are popular, but my favorite option is disposable
paper containers. The reason is simple and powerful: no dishes to
wash. Just search Amazon for "paper meal prep containers" and
you'll see plenty of options.
• Label Everything.
Write the meal name and the current date on each container to
avoid confusion later. To write on non-porous surfaces like glass,
take a cue from professional kitchens: use wax pencil. It writes
smoothly and resists condensation from the inside of a fridge, but
it's easily rubbed off with a dry cloth. Write on paper containers
with permanent marker.
• First In, First Out.
Store new meals in the back of the fridge or freezer, and the old
stuff at the front so you eat it first.
10 MEAL PREP GUIDE
FREEZING
The freezer is essential. It extends the life of your meals from days
to months. This allows expert meal preppers to eat for weeks from
single cooking session. a
While the food remains safe, the taste and texture will gradually
decline; aim to use frozen meals within 3-6 months.
Store in airtight containers to prevent freezer burn.
FREEZES WELL
• Cooked grains like rice
Most cooked proteins
Hardy cooked vegetables
like broccoli and peas
Soups and stews
Chili
DOESN'T FREEZE WELL
Watery vegetables like
cucumber turn to mush.
Mayonnaise separates.
Creamy/high-dairy dishes
separate.
Hardboiled eggs become
rubbery.
Fried or breaded foods
become soggy.
11 MEAL PREP GUIDE
SPOILAGE
You're not the only one who finds your food delicious.
Microorganisms like bacteria and mold want a bite, too. Given
warmth, moisture, and time, they will rapidly multiply and
decompose your food.
Refrigerating food cools it to 40°F (4°C). This doesn't prevent
spoilage, but it drastically slows down the process. You typically
have 3-4 days before the quality and safety of the food begins to
significantly decline.
Freezing food cools it to O°F (-18°C). This doesn't kill
microorganisms, but it does put them in a dormant state so they
can't grow. It's like hitting the pause button on spoilage. As long
as the food remains frozen, it will be safe to eat indefinitely.
Your food should always look, smell, and taste appetizing. It is
never worth the risk of food poisoning to eat a meal you are unsure
about. When in doubt, throw it out.
To be safe, throw out 5-day-old refrigerated meal prep.
12 MEAL PREP GUIDE
REHEATING
Reheating food isn't just for taste. The goal is to bring your meal
back to a safe temperature of at least 165°F (74°C) to eliminate
bacteria.
MICROWAVE
Speed and convenience make the microwave the most common
option for reheating food.
• Add Moisture.
Pour water on your hand, then flick a few droplets on the food, or
cover the food with a damp paper towel. This is especially
important for rice, pasta, and chicken, which have a tendency to
dry out.
Cover the Food.
Use a lid or a damp paper towel to trap steam. This helps the food
heat evenly and keeps your microwave clean.
Heat in Intervals.
Heating for one long stretch heats your food on the outside but
leaves it cold in the middle. Heat for 60-90 seconds at a time,
stirring or turning in between.
13 MEAL PREP GUIDE
REHEATING
OVEN
This method takes longer, but usually produces a better texture
than a microwave. It's well worth it if you have a little extra time.
Transfer your food to an oven-safe container like glass or ceramic,
then cover it loosely with foil. If you'd like a little crispiness, remove
the foil for the last few minutes.
When in doubt, heat at 350°F (175°C) for 10-20 minutes.
14 MEAL PREP GUIDE
REHEATING
STOVEТОР
This method gives you the most control and is perfect for meals
that are easily stirred, like soup and chili.
Lightly oil a pan or skillet. This prevents sticking and helps
rehydrate the food. Use medium heat and stir regularly to
distribute the heat and keep the food from burning.
15 MEAL PREP GUIDE
STOVEТОP HEATING
Food Recommended
Method Temperature Duration Tip
Chicken/
Turkey Breast Oven 325°F
(165°C)
15-25
mins
Add a splash of broth
and cover with foil.
Steak/
Pork Chop Stovetop High 1-2 mins
per side Heat and oil skillet first.
Fish Oven 275°F
(135°C)
10-15
mins Cover with foil.
Ground Beef Stovetop Medium 3-5
mins Add a splash of water.
Rice/
Quinoa Stovetop Low ~5
mins
Add a splash of water
and cover with a lid to
steam.
Pasta Stovetop Medium
/ Low
5-8
mins Stir gently.
Roasted
Vegetables
Oven /
Air Fryer
400°F
(200°C)
5-10
mins
Spread in a single layer
to re-crisp.
Soups/
Stews Stovetop Medium 5-10
mins Stir occasionally
Casserole /
Lasagna Oven 350°F
(175°C)
20-30
mins Cover with foil.
Burritos Oven 375°F
(190°C)
20-25
mins
Wrap in foil, then
unwrap for the last 5
mins to crisp.
16 MEAL PREP GUIDE
FINISHING TOUCHES
If an ingredient is stored separately (see the Ingredients section),
wait to add it until after the food is reheated. Vibrant avocado,
crunchy nuts, and creamy sauces make a big difference. They help
a meal taste fresh and give it a variety of textures.
17 MEAL PREP GUIDE
COMMON CHALLENGES
"I Don't Have Time."
This is the most common reason people give for not meal prepping,
but the math doesn't add up. You spend 1-2 hours total per week to
eliminate having to figure out meals. No cooking, no shopping, no
driving, no waiting. So the truth is: once you start, you'll soon
discover that you don't have time NOT to cook.
"I Get Bored Eating the Same Thing."
Boredom is a symptom of poorly-prepared food.
Use the recipes in my cookbooks to explore different flavors. Hone
your skills as a cook. Focus on making meals so delicious, you look
forward to eating them several times in the same week.
If you're comfortable with the basics of meal prep, you can try
component prepping: cook your protein, grains, and veggies
separately, then assemble them differently each day with different
sauces, spices, or toppings.
"I Don't Know What To Cook."
Now that you have my cookbooks, you do! My recipes are simple,
delicious, and packed with protein. They're designed to teach you
the fundamentals of cooking.
When you're ready to branch out, try searching for "easy sheet pan
dinners" or "one-pot meals."
18 MEAL PREP GUIDE
COMMON CHALLENGES
"My Food Tastes Bad Reheated."
Properly reheated food is delicious. Refer back to the reheating
guide to solve this.
The three most common mistakes are:
1. Not adding a sprinkle of moisture to rice and chicken
2. Using the microwave for foods that need an oven to stay crispy
3. Mixing in sauces and fresh toppings before storing/reheating
"I Don't Have Enough Containers."
You don't need an expensive set. Start with what you have, or get a
pack of disposable paper containers.
"I Don't Have Enough Storage Space."
If you can't find space to hold 4 meals in your fridge, it's time to
clean it out. Throw away the moldy stuff. If you still need space,
part with anything you can go weeks without using. Meal prep is
one of the best possible uses of a refrigerator, and it deserves
prime real estate.
Remember that the freezer is your best friend. You can cook large
batches of freezer-friendly meals and store them for weeks,
thawing a few at a time as needed.
19 MEAL PREP GUIDE
20
YOUR NEW LIFE SKILL
The goal of this guide is to help you build a system that makes
healthy eating your default. It's not about perfection, it's about
consistency. If you eat just one home-cooked meal a day, you're
ahead of most people. Celebrate that victory. As you gain
confidence, you can prep more, try new recipes, and feel even
better.
It
Meal prep is the tool that puts you in control of your nutrition.
makes healthy eating possible even for people who are tight on
time and money. Soon, the process will become second nature,
and you will have developed a skill that will serve you for the rest
of your life.
You have the plan and the recipes. You're ready to go. You've got
this. Start prepping and enjoy the process!
MEAL PREP GUIDE